So far we've learned how to read a DICOM,
inspect images extracted from single DICOM series,
and inspect header data from single DICOM files.
Now, let's zoom out.
In the industry, it's quite common that you'll receive
a large set of DICOM data that represent a population.
Metadata is a set of data that describes the population.
Here an example of metadata would be average age of the population.
This type of metadata will be relevant for your particular algorithm or use case.
Now, unless you're running a study or have a lot of money
to collect and select a very specific data set,
you'll likely be working with a data set with relevant and irrelevant data.
It's your job as the data scientist to determine and select relevant subsets.
Some metadata may come from the DICOM headers of all of the studies in your data set.
For example, patient ID,
patient age, and sex can all be found here.
You will likely need to join this with another data source though,
such as patient history,
to fully understand your patient population.
Finally, you need your image labels.
This must be part of your data set,
or else how will you know if you have
enough positive and negative cases to train an algorithm?
If you're looking for diagnostic labels,
you'll often have to go into the actual radiology reports or
get a new radiologist to come in and label them if you don't have the reports.
Before you can start training an algorithm,
you need to first explore the features of the data set to make sure that it's useful.
For example, if you are trying to build something to detect breast cancer,
but there's no breast cancer in the data,
then the data set is useless.
Histograms and scatterplots are
too powerful tools that can help us discover data features.
Histograms help us look at distributions of single variables.
Sometimes we only want to look at distributions within a single class of our data.
For example, we can use histograms to explore
the age range across people with lung cancer or gender distribution,
specifically in patients with Type 2 diabetes.
Scatterplots are useful for assessing relationships between two variables.
For example, we can use scatterplots to look
at the relationship between tumor size and age,
or the relationship between number of nodules and years of smoking history.
The Pearson correlation coefficient measures how two variables are linearly related.
The value of the Pearson correlation coefficient ranges from negative one to one.
A value of one or negative one means that two variables are perfectly linearly related,
and a value of zero implies there is no linear relationship between the two variables.
Finally, another useful tool is the co-occurrence matrix,
which is useful for assessing how frequently different classifications co-occur together.
For example, if we want to explore the frequency of
heart disease co-occurrence in the data set
with many other diseases like Type 2 diabetes,
obesity, and lung cancer,
we can plot a co-occurrence matrix.
A higher value indicates that two diseases are more likely to co-occur together.